Have you noticed how easy it is to lose friends over differences in political opinions? The ongoing Israel-Palestine conflict seems to be particularly effective at ending even long-standing relationships. Each person is firmly convinced that they have the (unique) morally correct perspective, and that anyone who disagrees must be either too evil or stupid to continue associating with. What's going on here?

Certain beliefs of ours are not just beliefs. They are held so deeply that they're intertwined with our very identities. Threatening them feels like a  threat to our very existence. Our minds therefore don't even let us recognize them _as_ beliefs: to do so would be to admit that we could be wrong. Therefore, they must be _facts_ — and because you fancy yourself a rational human being, the only way for them to become "facts" is for your mind to _warp your entire perceived reality_ into upholding them at any cost.

There's an analogy here with dreams. You would think that seeing a green dragon flying through your living room would alert you to the fact that you're dreaming, but because your mind's prime directive at that moment is to keep you immersed in the illusion, what happens instead is that your mind produces the thought "oh, silly me, it's just _green dragon Tuesday!_" — and you find it _completely_ satisfying.

Of course, to an outside observer (if such a thing were possible), you would seem ridiculous. But what they wouldn't be able to see is that something identical is happening within _their_ minds — even their _waking_ minds. And if someone tried to point theirs out, they would be just as incapable of seeing what was being shown to them. Instead, they would suspect that the person was crazy — or perhaps evil.

We also see this with a condition known as _anosognosia_ and its symptom of _confabulation._ People who have had a limb amputated are sometimes unable to recognize that it is now missing. No matter how carefully the doctor points it out, and from how many (physical and logical) angles, the person is simply unable to see it. Their mind warps their entire reality in such a way that they are somehow completely blind to the condition of _missing an arm_.

In this situation, the doctor (and the rest of the world) sees the _objective truth_, while the patient is delusional. By analogy, you may think that by fiddling with the right part of your brain, your self-deception could be eliminated such that you would only be able to hold objectively-true opinions. But the rabbit hole goes _so much deeper_: your perception of reality is so intimately bound up with your self-identity that when _all_ self-deception evaporates, what remains is so unlike "reality" as you know it that it simply cannot be described. But instead of getting lost in philosophy, let's return to the crucial point.

Other people are lost in "dreams" — and _so are you._ The way to live a compassionate life is not to violently dismantle their dreams, or to mock and shame them for being lost. Any time you feel the urge to do this, what's happening is that something deep within yourself is being threatened, and the only way out seems to be (psychological or physical) violence. You must learn to recognize that this is always a sign of _you yourself being lost_.

The less lost you become, the less you feel the need to treat others this way — no matter how "stupid" or "evil" they appear to be. You learn to instead _enter_ their dreams with them; to _see_ the green dragons that they're seeing, and why they make perfect sense. You learn to _gently_ dismantle whatever inner conflict is secretly responsible for generating the delusions that are harming them and causing them to harm others.

Paradoxically, this "gentle" dismantling _need not be physically gentle!_ Sometimes, shooting someone might be the most compassionate way to dismantle their delusions. The gentleness is something _psychological,_ and it is **very** hard to describe. It is not the same as being nice or sweet. It can be firm, fierce, and unrelenting. Perhaps it is best described by what it is not: there is never a trace of malice, contempt, or — crucially — self-righteousness. These are all unmistakable signs of delusion operating in _you_; indications that you yourself must now be rescued. Such a rescue will be especially difficult, because you will be _flawlessly_ convinced that you are in the right.

That is where much of the world finds itself now. Each of us is firmly convinced that we alone (or really, we and our allies) bear the torch of righteousness — and we have an unlimited supply of evidence to prove it to us. We are each lost in our own dreams, flawlessly certain that it is only _other_ people who are badly deluded — and that it is our noble duty to violently dismantle their illusions.

If you find yourself here, I will not be able to talk you out of it. Your mind is *far* more convincing than I could ever be. All I can ask is that you remember your commitment to compassion. Not your _idea_ of compassion — the one constructed from (and confined to) the particulars of your worldview, however "noble" it may be. That isn't true compassion, but its evil twin. An infinitely brighter Light shines from deep within you — and it is what our world most desperately right now.

