
There are times when you act against your own conscience. If you can understand what is going on in that state, you will come to appreciate the nature of _all_ evil --- which is a prerequisite for being able to effectively deal with the evil in others.

Your conscience is a manifestation of your deepest nature. Although you are always able to hear it, you sometimes pretend not to. In a certain sense, all you _consciously_ hear are your own justifications for why you don't have to listen. _He deserves it --- he's a jerk!_ _The world has been cruel to me, so I deserve to take this little thing._ Etc.

The knowledge of your wrongdoing exists in a kind of limbo. You know _perfectly well_ what you're doing, and yet you have partitioned your mind in such a way that this knowledge --- or at least, its true significance --- is carefully shielded from conscious self-reflection. You didn't create this rift because you're a _bad person._ You originally did it out of fear; to avoid some kind of pain. And yet the resultant mind-split is _itself_ intrinsically painful. This pain must then _also_ be pushed out of conscious awareness, lest it alert you to your carefully orchestrated self-deception. You are now on the lam from your own Light.

In this state, do you deserve _contempt_ for your evil and hypocrisy, or _compassion_ for the secret prison you've trapped yourself in? Regardless of what you deserve, consider what actually happens in each case.

If someone were to self-righteously call you out, you would instantly perceive them as a threat --- even if (or _especially_ if) they were entirely correct according to your _own_ deepest judgement. Their nastiness just pushes you further into the dark; gives you newfound justification (and motivation) to act against your conscience in the future. You have just become a little more evil yourself, but it doesn't _feel_ like it. You instead feel self-righteous in return.

On the other hand, some people seem to have the remarkable ability to encourage you to confront your own dishonesty in a way that isn't threatening. They may accomplish this through a variety of means that may be nice or not-so-nice, depending on what the circumstances call for. But even when their response is profoundly antagonistic to your apparent beliefs and aims, part of you can sense that they are somehow _allied_ with your deepest nature. Much as you might want to hate them, you will be unable.

Part of you can sense that the first person doesn't have your best interest at heart. And despite what they may say, they don't have the _world's_ best interest at heart, either. They are simply acting out their own darkness --- which means that they know _perfectly well_ that they are just making the world darker, even as they vigorously pretend _not_ to know. Their internal story is that they are only "fighting evil," which can never be wrong. What's actually happening is that their darkness is secretly _allying_ with yours, to create more of itself. The minds of everyone who witnesses this interaction are made darker as a result, too --- whether they can consciously detect it or not.

This is the insanely clever mechanism by which evil spreads itself beneath the threshold of conscious awareness, all in the name of _good._ Each of us is vomiting our darkness in every direction, fully convinced that we are doing the right thing. But part of us knows that we're not.

The second person has, in some way or another, become wise to this game, and refuses to take part. One possible reason is that they've healed the split in their own mind. In this case, they will not be triggered by your darkness, and so there will be no desire to fire back. From this position, they are better able to perceive whatever it is that is keeping you from acting in alignment with your Light, and can find clever ways to work with it. It's also possible that they haven't fully healed themselves. In this case, they will still be triggered by you, but recognize their outrage and contempt for what they are: their darkness attempting to gain a foothold.

At some level, each of us recognizes the sense in which kindness is always the right motivation in every situation, with no exceptions. This has nothing to do with being _nice_, which evil can certainly exploit. True kindness can be as gentle or as fierce as needed to get the job done. It's impossible to say what kindness looks like from the _outside_, because it can take on almost any form whatsoever. Yet you always know from the _inside_. There will be no pleasure in inflicting harm, nor the slightest trace of contempt. If those are present, it's not your Light you are operating from, but your darkness. And the only thing your darkness is capable of doing is creating more of itself.

Unfortunately, the further we get from our Light, the less we can admit to knowing this, and the harder it is to hear it from someone else. We are suspicious of their motivations. Are they telling us not to _fight evil_? Are they naive? Stupid? Evil? It therefore feels pointless or even counterproductive to write this piece. If what I have said is true, then the best thing I can do for you is to show you kindness, and not just talk about it. And yet there is something you can do for yourself.

Under certain circumstances --- for example, under the guidance of a strong psychedelic trip, or perhaps on your deathbed if you're unlucky --- it is possible to have a direct encounter with your Light. Whatever tricks you use to deceive yourself and others simply will not fly here. Every nook and cranny of your mind will be laid bare and lit up with the power of a thousand blazing suns. You will discover, to your abject horror, how every single thing you harshly judged others for was present, in some form or another, in your own mind. That is _why_ you judged them --- to keep your attention facing outward. In a certain sense, all the darkness you see in the world is simply a projection of the darkness in your own mind. 

But the Light is not here to _judge_ you for your hypocrisy. It's here to show you that you don't have to run anymore. You never did. You feared that your Light would smite you. You couldn't fathom a Love so profound that it wouldn't recoil even an _inch_ when gazing upon broken, sinful, little you; that it would Love you all the more for it. But --- _ta-da!_ --- here it is, living at the center of your very mind. As the astonishing power of Unconditional Love floods your entire being, you remember that this is all you ever wanted. It is also the greatest gift you have to offer others --- even though it will sometimes look _nothing at all_ like "love" as we commonly understand it.

People are _unfathomably_ broken, and this brokenness manifests in all manner of surprising and horrific ways. The more broken, the more help they need, and yet the more _evil_ they look --- and so the more our _own_ darkness gets triggered, the more harm we wish upon them, and the more darkness we end up creating. It takes tremendous patience, courage, and wisdom to break through to the part of them that still wants (and deserves) redemption, but in the end, it is the only thing that works. And that makes it the most worthwhile goal of all.