# A miraculous paradox

Something genuinely astonishing and completely unexpected happens when you realize, for the first time, that you have _absolutely no idea_ what reality is: you finally **see** reality for the very first time, and it is glorious beyond belief. You find what you didn't know you were searching for.

First, let's back up. What do I mean you have "absolutely no idea" what reality is? Surely science knows, if not perfectly, then at least _mostly_? But consider: how can you be sure that all of reality didn't [suddenly pop into being](https://rationalwiki.org/wiki/Last_Thursdayism), fully formed, just five minutes ago—with only the _appearance_ of a real past (including false memories, as well as all the apparent science "proving" otherwise)? It surely _feels_ extremely unlikely, but can we compute the odds?

If you consider the problem carefully enough, you'll find that it is impossible to estimate how likely it is to be true without resorting to circular reasoning in some way or another. Therefore, it is not meaningful to call the hypothesis either "likely" or "unlikely." [The same goes for countless other skeptical hypotheses](/philosophy/radical-skepticism.md), such as the idea that reality is a dream or simulation etc.: their probabilities cannot be estimated without resorting to fundamentally untestable assumptions about whatever may be "outside" of this reality.

So _reasoning_ and _evidence_ are not enough to ascertain the true nature of reality. But there is a technique that can. It's just not a technique you would ever think of, given your current preconceptions. First I will describe the technique, and then I will hint at why it can show you anything about reality, and finally I will hint at what the result is like.

Ready?

Simply give your full attention to the awesome mystery all around and inside you, while deeply releasing all pretense of having _any_ idea what it is or what is causing it (including the very ideas of "inside" and "outside"; time; etc.) That's it. It is much harder than it sounds, but it can be done.

Your first instinct will probably be that this can't possibly tell you anything about the nature of reality: the most it could do is tell you about the nature of your individual mind, generated by your (very real and limited) brain. Your confidence in this belief will be just as unshakable as your confidence in a "real past"—and it is equally unjustified. Nonetheless, it will very effectively prevent the "breakthrough."

So why _can_ this practice tell you anything? Again, I can only offer a hint.

If you really _are_ an individual being at the mercy of a fundamentally external reality, then you are indeed limited in what you can know. You would have to _infer_ the nature of your reality, which is intrinsically fraught. But how do you know that you _are_ an individual being? Because it _seems_ that way? What if you are actually the Whole of reality, dreaming that you're not? Might Reality have provided itself with a way to ascertain the truth in a way beyond all inference—a way that no limited being could even fathom[1]?

[^1]: After all, if you _could_ imagine it, then it could not serve as the kind of self-validating knowledge required for this purpose. It would be just another _experience_, as unreliable as any other. What we are talking about is not an "experience" as usually understood. It is, in a sense, _orthogonal_ to experience.

So what is it like to "break through"?

You will finally look at reality for the very first time. You suddenly notice that the "lights are on"—and have always _been_ on—in an _impossibly_ miraculous sense. It is as though you are staring at something that _can't possibly be_, and yet—wonder of wonders!—unmistakably _is._ Or, rather, _it_ is somehow staring at _itself_. It is pure paradox; pure magic; pure _Love_! It is a comically satisfying resolution to the Deepest Question of All, hidden in the last place anyone thinks to look: right HERE.

Up until that moment, you are always subtly looking _away_ from reality, because you take it for granted. In each moment, you have an underlying feeling of "what's the big deal? I can explain all of this, more or less. And anyway, I've been experiencing it for decades, so why bother looking too carefully right now?" But _have_ you been experiencing it for decades? Or did you and reality suddenly pop into being just _now_?

Such an awakening can happen in varying degrees. At its fullest, it will shatter absolutely _everything_ you supposedly know, and replace it with something infinitely more marvelous—though, paradoxically, that "something" is also already fully here now, and is completely normal.

Don't take my word for it. Instead, why not simply do the most radically honest thing possible? Let go of all of your unjustified beliefs about reality, and fully immerse yourself in what is _actually_ here. Worst case, you will "awaken" to your life in the conventional sense, becoming more present, fulfilled, etc. Best case, you awaken in a sense _far_ beyond what our feeble imaginations can fathom—or what our culturally-sanctioned worldview can presently allow.

> *So close you can't see it <br/>
> So deep you can't fathom it <br/>
> So simple you can't believe it <br/>
> So good you can't accept it* <br/>
> — Tibetan Buddhist saying
